Demis, thank you so much.
>> Exciting to be here. Um, thanks everyone
for coming. It's great to be here.
>> We're we're so honored to have you at
our chocolate factory.
>> Yes, I had just heard about that. Yeah,
looking forward to the chocolate
afterwards.
>> Excellent. Well, Demis, we're going to
jump right in. We have one of the
OGs in every way. Uh, original thinkers,
founders, visionaries in all things AI.
A true believer, true scientist in in
Demis.
Uh, we're going to spend the beginning
of the conversation about the early
days.
Then early days of DeepMind, and then
we'll get into the science and open up
the room for some questions. So, let's
jump right in.
So, Demis, you were a chess prodigy.
Uh, you also were a founder of a gaming
company.
You're a neuroscientist,
and you're the founder of DeepMind, and
now leader of a really big consequential
company.
Those seem like pretty unrelated pieces,
but you've said that there's a common
thread.
Can you walk us through that?
>> There is a common thread, and um,
maybe I made it into a common thread.
So, it could be a post talk, you know,
sort of shaping. But, I wanted to do AI
for a long time. So, I kind of decided
it was the most important thing I could
possibly and most interesting I could do
in my teenage years.
And then I picked things to study or do
that I felt would eventually would help
me
build a company like DeepMind. So, I I
had that
as a plan from about 15, 16 years old. I
had a detour into games because actually
that was in the '90s, this is,
that's where all the most cutting edge
technology was being done.
Obviously, not just in AI, but in
graphics especially, including hardware
of course. The GPUs we all use today,
they were designed for graphics engines,
and we use the I mean, I was using the
very first GPUs back in the day in the
late '90s.
So, there was a lot of really cutting
edge technology, and then all the games
I made, including all the games I did
for Bullfrog, but also my own company,
Elixir Studios, all involved AI as the
main gameplay component. So, probably
the most, you know, well-known game I
made was Theme Park when I was about 17,
and that was a simulation of an
amusement park, and thousands of little
people came into your theme park and
played on your rides and decided what to
buy from the shops. So, there was a
whole kind of economics AI model
underneath. And it was one of the first
games of its type along with SimCity.
And when I saw it sold, you know, 10
million plus copies, and when I saw how
delighted people were to interact with
the AI, you know, that was one of the
things that made me think about spending
my whole career on it. Um and then, of
course, neuroscience
is to get inspiration from how the brain
works, and
and and different algorithmic ideas from
that, and then just bringing all those
different things together for the start
of DeepMind when the timing we felt was
right. And then, of course, we use games
as the early proving ground for our AI
ideas.
>> Mhm.
So, we've got a room full of founders
here,
and you can relate because you're a
founder not just once, but twice.
>> Mhm.
>> Take us back to the first time. Elixir
Studios.
>> Mhm.
>> What was that like? It's not the startup
that you're most known for,
>> Mhm.
>> but it was one that you had incredible
success with.
>> Mhm.
>> How did you lead that, and what did it
teach you about building?
>> Well, look, we we we start I started
Elixir Studios straight out of college,
um and uh I was lucky enough to work at
Bullfrog Productions, which, those of
you know games, it was a kind of
legendary game studio
uh in the early days of the game
industry, probably the best one in the
UK in in Europe. And uh I wanted to do
something that combined uh pushed AI.
So, effectively, I was funding AI back
in those days through the back door,
through games development.
Um and then push the the forefront of
that and combine it with cutting-edge
creativity. And I think that's still
relevant today with the way we do our
blue sky research, but maybe the biggest
lesson I learned was you want to be um 5
years ahead of your time, not 50 years
ahead. So, we tried to do a game called
Republic at Elixir Studios which
simulated a whole country, and then the
idea of the game is you could sort of um
overthrow, I think there was a dictator
in charge of the country in any number
of different ways. And we basically
simulated living, breathing cities. And
this is Bearing in mind, this is like
the late '90s on a Pentium. So, we had
to get all the graphics and all the AI
for million people
um working on uh you know, home PC at
the time. So, it was a little bit
ambitious. And um
and maybe it was too ambitious. And it
caused it caused probably some some
issues. And I took that lesson with me
of like, you want to be ahead of your
time, you don't want to be obviously
when it's obvious to everyone, it's too
late. But um if you're 50 years ahead,
then there's probably no way you can get
it to be successful.
>> All right. So, speaking of not being too
far ahead of your time, it was 2009 and
you decided there would be AGI.
>> Mhm.
Yes.
>> [laughter]
>> Maybe it was only you know, 10 years
ahead of our time that time. Better than
50 years.
>> So, so tell us about again, room full of
founders here. Tell us about '09.
How did you convince the first few
brilliant talents? Cuz you pulled in
really high-caliber employees, early
team members. How did you convince them
to believe in what seemed like total
sci-fi at the time?
>> Well, there was some interesting threads
that I think we picked up on. I I think
we thought we were 5 years ahead, but
maybe we were more like 10. But it was,
you know, deep learning had just been
invented by Jeff Hinton and colleagues
sort of in academia, but almost no one
had really realized it was a big deal.
Uh we knew a lot about reinforcement
learning, and we felt there was huge
progress to be made by combining those
two techniques which almost had never
been mixed together really, certainly
not at any kind of anything other than
toy problems. Uh in the academic
subjects, they're quite two quite siloed
parts of AI.
Um then we could see the compute uh the
GPUs at the time were going to be really
useful. Of course, we use TPUs now, um
but the accelerated computing industry
was was was going to be very helpful. Uh
and then we also felt at the end of my
PhD and post-doc and some of the other
people I got together were computational
neuroscientists that we had enough ideas
and principles um from the brain that
could be useful, including the idea that
reinforcement learning uh could
eventually scale uh to AGI. So, um so we
felt we had these ingredients and we
almost felt like we were keepers of a
secret because no one uh either in
academia or industry really believed
that any big progress was possible. In
fact, a lot of the people in academia uh
used to roll out that that, you know,
literally rolled their eyes up at us
when we were sort of suggesting we would
work on AGI or strong AI, as it was
sometimes called at the time, um because
it was like, "Well, we know this doesn't
work. So, you know, everyone tried it in
the '90s." You know, I did my post-doc
at MIT, which was the which was the sort
of center uh
uh point for expert systems. Um uh and
first all the logic language systems. I
mean, it seems amazing to think that
now, but I was already feeling that that
was archaic then, but they they, you
know, that's still how it was done both
in Cambridge in the UK and also in MIT,
these big centers of traditional AI. Um
and it felt like, but actually that
convinced me even more that we were onto
something because at least if we were
going to fail, we would fail in a
different way than people had failed,
you know, to get to AGI in the '90s. So,
that felt like it was worth doing uh no
matter what, even if obviously it was
research, we didn't know for sure it
would be successful, but at least we
would we would fail in a original way if
it didn't work.
>> Was there any common sticking point in
that early belief? Was there something
that you had to prove either to yourself
or to your early followers to get them
on board?
>> Well, it was
I mean, we had Put it this way. I would
have been spent my life on AI um no
matter what had happened. So, as it's
turned out, it's gone
you know, it's sort of gone on the
absolutely amazing side of the
optimistic side of what we thought.
Still actually within what we were
predicting in 2010, we thought it would
be a 20-year mission.
And I think we're basically exactly on
track as a field for that, and obviously
we played our part in that. But even if
it hadn't transpired that way, and it
was still now niche subject, that's all
that's what I would still be doing
because I felt it was the most important
technology ever. It feels obvious to me,
you know, our original state mission
statement at DeepMind was step one,
solve solve intelligence, I build AGI.
Step two, use it to solve everything
else. So, it was always I always thought
it was the most important technology
that could ever be invented, but also
the most interesting one. So, as a tool
for science, as an interesting artifact
in itself, and actually as one of the
best ways to understand our own minds,
you know, like the nature of
consciousness, dreaming, creativity, all
of these questions I had as a
neuroscientist, I felt one of the things
that was missing was an analysis tool
like AI, but also a comparison, a that
you could do sort of a controlled
experiment, study, and compare
two different systems against each
other.
>> Mhm. Let's talk about AI for science.
You've been early to that, you've been a
believer, and you've been really a
purist about this. This is the driving
mission. What about the way you set up
DeepMind and set the culture has
positioned it to be on the constant
forefront of AI for science?
>> Well, that was the
the ultimate goal, at least for me, my
personal passion. There's one There's my
own drive to build AI, which was to
advance science and medicine and and our
understanding of the world. It's my
expression of that mission was to sort
of do it in a meta way, right? Build the
build the the ultimate tool, and then
come back when that was ready and use it
to make breakthroughs in science, things
like AlphaFold that we've done, and I
think many more things. So, we've always
had that at the heart of what we've been
trying to do at DeepMind. So, actually,
we've had an AI for science group
division
led by Pushmeet Kohli that
has existed for nearly a decade now.
Actually, pretty much the day after we
got back from Seoul in the AlphaGo
match, which is sort of 10 years to the
month now,
is when we started formally started the
AI for science efforts cuz I was waiting
for the algorithms to be powerful enough
and the ideas to be general enough
and for me, you know, cracking Go was
that point, that time
that we thought, "Okay, now we're ready
to really apply these ideas to important
real-world problems starting with these
big scientific challenges." So, we've
always had that in mind as the the most
beneficial use of of AI. Like, what
could be better than using it to, you
know, cure diseases and give us
healthier lifespans and and to help with
medicine, followed, obviously, by other
really important areas like material
science and the environment and energy
and these kinds of topics, which I think
AI is also going to be have a huge part
to play in the next few years.
>> And how does AI break through in
biology? You're deeply involved with
Isomorphic. This is an area of deep
passion. You have been a purist on the
potential of AI to cure diseases from
the very beginning.
When do we have the type of moment that
we've had in language and coding but in
biology?
>> Yeah, well, I I mean, I'd argue we've
already had one of those moments with
AlphaFold. So,
you know, this is a 50-year grand
challenge, protein folding, and the 3D
structure of proteins is incredibly
important thing to know about if you
want to design medicines or if you want
to understand biology. Of course, it's
only one part of the drug discovery
process, an important part, but it's
only one part. So, Isomorphic Labs,
which is our,
you know, later spin-out, having a lot
of fun running that as well, and it is
is to build adjacent technologies in
more biochemistry and chemistry space
that can actually design the compounds
automatically to kind of fit and bind to
the right part of the protein. So, we
now know the protein that the shape of
the protein, we know that what's on the
on the surface of the protein and what
we have to target.
Um and but now we've got to build the
right compound that of course binds
strongly to where you want it to bind on
the target of interest, but doesn't bind
to anything else ideally cuz that would
be a a toxic side effect. So, um the
dream is to do almost all the
exploration
uh which is 99% of the of the work and
the time in silico and then save the the
the the wet lab step just for the
validation step. Right? So, that would
be um you know, I think if we can do
that and and I think we can get there in
the next few years, um I think we could
reduce drug discovery times instead of
that for taking like, you know, an
average of 10 years down to months,
maybe even weeks and perhaps even days
one day. And um and then I think then
all disease could be in reach and I
think things like personalized medicine
will become possible. Uh you know, like
personalized variations off of base
medicines. So, uh I think the whole of
uh the whole medical area, drug
discovery areas is going to be
revolutionized in the next in next few
years.
>> Brilliant. You talked a lot about AI for
science.
>> Mhm.
>> Do you think that at some point AI will
create new sciences? Al uh industrial
revolution and thermodynamics, will
there be something new taught
fundamentally in our education system?
And if so, what would it be like?
>> Well, I think there's several things
uh
that along those lines that I think we
is going to happen. So, first of all, um
the understanding and the analysis of AI
systems themselves, I think it's going
to become a whole science, a kind of
engineering science. These incredible
incredibly interesting artifacts that we
are building and um they're incredibly
complex as well. As complex eventually
they'll be as complex as the human mind
and the brain. And so, they'll need to
be studied so we can understand fully,
way beyond where we we are today, how
these systems work. So, I think there's
a whole kind of field mech and tarp is
part of that, but there's a lot more, I
think, that we can do to analyze uh
these systems. So, that'll be a science.
But, I think also um
AI itself will maybe unlock new
sciences, which is maybe what you're
getting at. Um I the one I'm
particularly excited about is AI for
simulations. So, I I love simulations.
All my all the games I wrote not only
had AI, but they were simulations. And I
think simulations is the way we can
address some of the um what we maybe
think of social sciences uh like
economics um
and and other more humanistic subjects
because um it's very difficult to do
control studies in that, you know, why
aren't they just sciences like physics
today? Because the problem is they're
emergent systems um just like biology,
actually. And it's very hard to do
repeated controlled experiments. You
know, if you raise interest rates by
half a percent, you have to do it in the
real world and then see what happens.
You can have theories, but you can't run
it thousands of times. But, if you could
simulate things uh really accurately,
then maybe there's sort of new sciences
to be done where you can sort of uh
rigorously sample uh from a very
accurate simulator.
Um and then I think that will turn that
give allow us to make much better
decisions in these today what are very
uncertain
uh domains.
>> What will it take to get to those
extremely accurate simulations? World
models? What kind of science is
necessary and engineering to get
>> Yeah, well, look, I I mean, I'm thinking
a lot about that in we do a ton of that
work at AI like learning simulators is
basically what it'd be. So, you know,
these are in domains where you can't We
don't know the mathematics of it well
enough or it's perhaps too complex. We
can't just write We can't just write a
uh uh uh directly down a special case
simulator. Um Um, it's just not accurate
enough, doesn't capture all the
variables. Um, we're doing that it was
done in with weather.
Um, we have the most accurate kind of
weather simulator in the world, Weather
Next. And it's far faster than what the
meteorologists use.
>> weather yet?
>> No, we can't. We can't, no. And I'm not
sure that would be a good idea. But the
the first step is to understand it
better.
Um, and but then even biology, you know,
we we're working on a kind of what I
call a virtual cell. So, you have hugely
um, dynamical emergent system. And I
think biology is
perfect uh,
sort of machine learning is perfect
description language for biology in the
same way math is for physics. Because I
think in biology and in lots of these
natural systems you have loads of weak
signals, weak correlations, tons of
data, far too much than any human mind
can analyze. But there are connections
and correlations and interesting
causalities within that mass of data.
So, I think it's sort of it's always
struck me that machine learning is the
perfect tool
to describe those kinds of systems.
Where until today, you know, mathematics
hasn't been able to do that. Either
because we can't manage it as as top
mathematicians cuz too complex or the
expressive power of math is not enough
for
to understand these sort of highly
emergent dynamical systems.
>> Is it also because of the messiness and
stochastic nature of Yeah, sure.
>> And and I mean eventually you could by
the way, once you learn these
simulators, it maybe there's maybe
there's another branch of new branch of
science. You could maybe extract some
equations from the once you have the
simulator. So, you have this sort of
implicit simulator or intuitive
simulator and then maybe you could
extract explicit equations from that.
Um, because partly cuz you could also
sample it as many times as you want.
>> As fundamental as Maxwell's or
>> Maybe. If if I don't know that exists
for such emergent systems, um, but if
they do exist, I don't see we we won't
be able to find them in this with this
with this methods.
>> That would be amazing. You've talked
about this theory that the basic
building block of of everything in the
universe could be information like. This
is more theoretical. How do you think
about it that and what does that mean
for
a traditional classical Turing computer?
>> Well, look, I think you can of course
all the famous, you know, equals mc
squared and all the stuff Einstein did
and energy and matter are kind of
equivalent.
But I actually think information has a
kind of equivalence in the same way. So
you can think of, you know, the
organization of matter and structure and
especially things like biology that are
resisting entropy as basically
information processing systems at their
heart. So I think one can convert all of
those three kind of quantities into each
other, but I have this feeling
information is most fundamental. So it's
a little bit the opposite way around to
the classic physicist thought in the
1920s and things where, you know, it's
sort of energy and matter primary.
I actually think it's a better to to
better way to understand the world the
universe is to think about it as
information first. And if that's true,
and I think there's quite a lot of
evidence for that, then of course AI is
even more
sort of profound in a sense
>> Totally.
>> than we think and it's already pretty
profound because it's it's also about
organizing information and understanding
information
and constructing
information or objects. So AI in my
opinion is all about information
processing.
So I think there's something sort of
very deeply connected with with these
different areas if you think of it
through the lens of information
processing as the primary way to think
about it. And do you think a classical
Turing machine will be able to compute
everything? Well, I sometimes think you
know, I sometimes sort of think about
what we're doing and refer to ourselves
as Turing's champion because Turing
machines, I think Alan Turing is one of
my all time, you know, favorite
scientific heroes.
I think what he did obviously laid the
foundations for the computers for
computer science but also AI.
And I think it's one of the most
profound results ever is the Turing
machine result. You know, that
everything that is computable can be
computed by relatively simple
description of a machine.
So I think our brains are
likely to be approximate Turing
machines.
And I think it's interesting to think
about the connection between Turing
machines and quantum computers and
quantum systems. But I think at least
what we've shown with things like
AlphaGo and especially AlphaFold
is that
classical Turing machine obviously in
the guise of a modern neural network
it can model what was thought to be in
the case of protein folding is a quantum
system. You know, in some sense it's
very you know, it's dealing with very
small
particles
and one might think you'd have to take
into account all the quantum effects of
the water bonds and all sorts of things.
But it turns out you can get to an
approximate
optimal sort of solution on a classical
system. So it may turn out that a lot of
things that we think are
would need a quantum system to model or
run might be modelable on a classical
system if thought about in the right
way.
>> So
you've talked about AI consistently as a
tool. Like a telescope or a microscope
astrolabe
through the centuries.
When you think about a machine that can
model almost anything
let's say it can't even model quantum
systems like you pointed out. When does
it stop becoming a tool and will that
ever happen?
>> Well, my my my feeling strong feeling is
we should in this sort of mission to and
journey to build AGI
those of us on that journey many of
people in this room, you know, I feel
like it would be best to build a tool
first
an incredibly intelligent and useful and
precise tool and then cross the the the
next sort of Rubicon. That's already
profound enough and has, you know, of
course the tool could start becoming
more and more autonomous and agent-like
that we're all seeing. We're in the
midst of that the agent era now.
But then there's a further step of like,
you know, does it have agency? Is it
conscious? These sorts of questions
which are also going to be questions
we're going to need to address, but I
would um
I would recommend we do that as a second
step. Perhaps using the tool in the
first step to help us
with those next profound questions and
ideally also we could understand
our own brain and and minds better and
define things like consciousness a lot
more precisely than we can today.
>> Do you have estimations of what that
definition of consciousness might look
like?
>> No, I mean I haven't got much to add
beyond that thousands of years of
philosophy hasn't said already, but I
mean it's very clear to me that
it's obvious some components are going
to be needed. Probably necessary but not
sufficient. Like things like
self-awareness
and, you know, the idea of self and
other,
some kind of continuity over time. So
some of these things are clearly needed
for anything that might look like
consciousness, but I mean obviously it's
an open question as to as to
what the full definition is and I've
talked to many of the great philosophers
about that. Daniel Dennett
obviously sadly passed away recently,
but we had a long conversation a few
years back about this and I think um
you know, one of the issues is how does
a system behave? Does it behave like a
conscious system? So that's
you know, you could argue some of the AI
systems might end up being able to do
that as they get close to AGI.
But then there's still the question of
why do you you know, why do we think
each other are conscious? One is the way
we're behaving. We're behaving like
conscious beings, but the other thing is
we're we're we're running on the same
substrate. So I think if both those
things are true, then it's parsimonious
to imagine you're you're experiencing
the same thing I'm experiencing, which
is why we don't have that debate
about, you know, normally about as are
each other conscious. But, I think we'll
obviously we'll never have the substrate
equivalence with an artificial system.
So, there'll there'll always be a I
think it'll be hard to to completely
close that gap. So, you can look at it
behaviorally, but but what about
experientially?
There are probably some ways to do that
post AGI, but let me speak about out of
scope today even for AI for science
discussion.
Yeah.
>> Brilliant. So, we're going to open the
room to questions in just a moment. Get
your questions ready.
But, you brought up philosophers. You've
mentioned Kant and Spinoza as two of
your two of your favorite philosophers.
Kant is this
you know, deontological, highly
duty-driven
philosopher. Spinoza almost has this
deterministic view of the universe. How
do you kind of connect those two
beliefs? And where where is your
thinking of how the world looks?
>> Well, the reason I like those two they
they stuck out for me is that
I think Kant when when I was doing my
PhD in neuroscience, you know, his
his sort of statements about the mind
creates reality, right? I think that's
basically true. And
and so, another reason to study the
mind, right? How the brain works.
And I'm interested ultimately in the
nature of reality. So, we have to
understand how the mind is interpreting
that.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, I think that's for me what I
took from Kant. And then Spinoza is more
about the
you could almost call spiritual
dimension of like, well, if you're
trying to understand the universe using
science in my case as the tool, you're
sort of understanding some deep mystery
about how the universe works, right? In
a in a really
uh uh
kind of deep way. And
that's what I feel I'm we're doing and
I'm doing when, you know, I do my
science and we work on AI and we're
building these tools is somehow we're
kind of
reading the language of of the universe.
>> Beautiful.
What a beautiful way to say what you do
every day. Demis, scientist, orator, and
philosopher.
We will, before we wrap, do a couple of
rapid-fire questions.
>> Okay.
>> Thank you for
>> [laughter]
>> finishing He's not seen these yet.
Over under on distribution year of AGI.
>> Oh, wow.
Um
>> Or reject premise of question.
>> No, 2030. I've been pretty consistent
about that.
>> Okay, 2030.
Must read book, poem, or paper
for when we achieve AGI.
>> Oh, wow.
Um
As for when we achieve once we achieve
it,
um
Well, my favorite book is The Fabric of
Reality by David Deutsch, so I think
that still holds. I'd hope to answer the
questions in that book with with the
AGI. That's my post-AGI work.
>> Brilliant.
>> Yeah.
>> Proudest moments so far in DeepMind.
>> Oh, wow.
Um we've been lucky to have a lot. I
mean, probably AlphaFold.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, a couple games questions. If you
were engaged in a high-stakes
strategy game, turn-based strategy game.
>> Okay.
>> Civ,
Polytopia, strategy games.
And you can select one scientist from
history. We're thinking the the
Einsteins, the Turings, Newtons. Who
would you select to be on your team?
>> On my team?
>> On your team.
>> Oh, gosh.
>> [laughter]
>> Um probably von Neumann, I think. I
mean, he's Yeah, you want a game
theorist, I think. And I think I think I
think I think he's the best.
>> Makes sense.
>> I feel he'd be a good teammate. Yeah.
>> All right.
>> Yeah.
>> [snorts]
>> Well, Demis, you do it all. Thank you so
much for being with us. Please join me
in thanking Demis.
>> [applause]